post/react url splitting (#79)
xmartlabs/blog: _posts/2019-04-29-url-splitting.md

---
layout: post
title: URL Splitting and React (Part 1)
date: 2019-04-29 09:00:00
author: Matías Lorenzo
categories: React, URL splitting
author_id: mlorenzo
featured_position: 1
featured_image: /images/url-splitting/banner.jpg
---

As devices become more powerful, web apps tend to have heavier client-side logic. In particular, Single Page Applications (SPAs) have become very popular in these past years, with the advent of battle-tested frontend frameworks such as React, Angular or Vue.

These kind of apps aim to reduce as much load from the servers as possible by, for example, caching data aggressively and avoiding reloads. Why spend money upgrading your servers when your users have all this unused potential on their top-of-the-line phones and PCs?

## The Problem

Heavier client-side apps are not even close to being a panacea. As code sent to the client grows in size, first-time loads tend to take longer and longer. This isn't good, but could be [worse than you think](https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/marketing-resources/data-measurement/mobile-page-speed-new-industry-benchmarks/).

> Caching, compressing and CDNs tend to reduce loading times, but huge code also means parsing and execution times are bigger. At a certain point, pushing more code to the user becomes less and less effective.

Author: How about `get bigger`?

> Say you have a very big SPA, with 20 distinct pages. Does the user really need all that code? Will the user navigate all those 20 pages everytime they use your app? I'm willing to bet, in most cases, no. So, if the user only needs a subset of the code at any one time, why not split it? Enter URL splitting.

Author: I agree with every time, but not the others. I they sound good as they are :thinking:

## URL Splitting

When apps are big, the user will probably navigate on a subset of the app's pages for a while, and then switch to another subset, or close the app. If the app is well designed, this behavior makes a lot of sense: if you're trying to do something, the tools to do it should be on screen, or a minimal amount of clicks away.

URL splitting is the act of splitting an SPA in multiple sub apps, which will be in charge of knowing how to render a subset of the URLs of the app.

Let's create an example: think of an e-commerce app. This app let's users browse products, either by searching manually or looking through a catalog by category. Naturally, users can fill their cart and then proceed to the checkout process, which is fairly complex: users have to specify their address, billing information, select what shipping option they want, and then confirm the purchase. Also, the app has a static pages section with a lot of information on how the business works, terms and conditions, FAQs, and more.

> If you've ever used an e-commerce app, you know you certainly don't navigate through all the pages everytime you use it. Most likely you spend some time looking at products, probably in more than one sitting (buying that sixty inch TV takes convincing), then go through the whole checkout process if you decide to buy. And you probably won't ever visit the static pages unless you are really interested on their business or have a question.

Author: I've reworded it a little differently:

```suggestion
II'm willing to bet that, if you've ever used an e-commerce app, you probably don't navigate through all the pages every time you use it. Most likely you spend some time looking at products, probably in more than one sitting (buying that sixty inch TV takes convincing), then go through the whole checkout process if you decide to buy. And you probably won't ever visit the static pages unless you are really interested on their business or have a question.
```

> If you've ever used an e-commerce app, you know you certainly don't navigate through all the pages everytime you use it. Most likely you spend some time looking at products, probably in more than one sitting (buying that sixty inch TV takes convincing), then go through the whole checkout process if you decide to buy. And you probably won't ever visit the static pages unless you are really interested on their business or have a question.

Reviewer: Be careful with **II'm**

- **Static Pages App**: will contain all pages related to information and FAQs.

Here's a crude diagram of how our app would be split, with some examples of the URLs each will be in charge of.

<img width="100%" src="/images/url-splitting/apps-diagram.png">

You might be wondering why we put the login and register page on the Checkout App. Why not split a fourth app with all these pages? Well, you certainly could! But in this case it makes sense that, most of the time, users will log in or register when starting the checkout process. Threading authentication and checkout together seems like a good idea, but to be really sure we'd need to check the analytics of similar businesses.

## Implementation

Before moving on to the implementation, I've gone ahead and created a [repository on Github](https://github.com/mlvieras/url-splitting-and-react) that follows this tutorial. Feel free to check it out if you don't want to do everything from scratch! Also, it might be useful if you get stuck somewhere. I've structured the commits by section, so you can navigate the changes needed on individual sections.

### Setting Up

> Let's take a look at how to implement this. Please note that there are many ways to implement URL splitting on your app, depending on your project setup and what technologies you're using. In this example we'll take a look at how to do it using React with Webpack as our bundler. To make things easy, we'll start by creating a project with [Create React App](https://github.com/facebook/create-react-app). If you're following at home, make sure to use [`create-react-app@2.1.8`](https://github.com/facebook/create-react-app/releases/tag/v2.1.8) to get exactly the same output when creating your app.

Author: What I was trying to say with `following at home` was if the reader is following the tutorial step by step.

First, create your new app (you'll need Node >= `8.10.0`):

```bash
npx create-react-app@2.1.8 my-app && cd my-app
```

Then eject the app to get access to all the configuration files. In some of the most common cases you don't need to eject the app, but I like to do it always (I don't like not knowing what's going on under the hood 😁).

```bash
npm run eject
```

Now that we have our blank canvas to work with, let's get our hands dirty.

### Boilerplate

> We'll need a couple of files to get started. First, we'll need three different app entrypoints. The current one is `src/App.js`. Let's create a `src/apps` directory where to put all our entrypoints. These files will work as root files that start the corresponding React app. We'll need three since we don't want to mix the code of all three apps, and also you might want to configure some things differently. Think of three separate React apps living in the same repository.

Reviewer: _entrypoints_ should be separated

**may** instead of **might**

Our first app will be located in `src/apps/products`. The directory structure could be as follows:

```text
/src
  |- /apps
    |- /products
      |- app.js
      |- app.test.js
      |- app.css
      |- index.js
```

What I've done here is simply move the files that were on `src/` and renamed them (we don't use Pascal Case to name component files, but you can do it if you like). We'll have to adapt them down the line, but we'll cross that bridge when we get there.

> You should create similar files for the other two apps (`checkout` and `static-pages`). In some cases you might want some configuration to work similarily across apps (for example, the router, debugging components). So what we usually do is create an `AppTemplate` component that serves that purpose, and then simply render that component in each `app.js` file. For simplicity, let's take the code that's in the initial `App.js` file and put it in `src/apps/app-template.js`.

Reviewer: may instead of might.

I would say "lets **copy** the code that's in....... and **paste** it .."

```jsx
/* src/apps/app-template.js */
import React, { Component } from 'react';
import logo from './logo.svg';

class AppTemplate extends Component {
  render() {
    return (
      <div className="App">
        <header className="App-header">
          <img src={logo} className="App-logo" alt="logo" />
          <p>
            Edit <code>src/App.js</code> and save to reload.
          </p>
          <a
            className="App-link"
            href="https://reactjs.org"
            target="_blank"
            rel="noopener noreferrer"
          >
            Learn React
          </a>
        </header>
      </div>
    );
  }
}

export { AppTemplate };
```

Then, in each of our `app.js` files we'll do something like this:

```jsx
/* src/apps/products/app.js */
import React from 'react';

import { AppTemplate } from '../app-template';
import './app.css';

const App = () => (
  <AppTemplate />
);

export default App;
```

> **Note:** I've negleted to show a few updates you'll need to do to other files, but they should be pretty evident (for example updating imports in each of the apps `index.js` files).

Reviewer: negle**c**ted

This setup will allow to centralize configuration of things that need to go on every sub app, while also allowing us to override or add local configuration to a specific app. You can even pass props to `AppTemplate` if you want, to make this approach even more versatile. Right now all our `app.js` files are equal, but as apps grow, they'll start changing and becoming more complex.

> If you try to start the project now, it will most certainly crash. That's because we haven't told Webpack we want it to process multiple entrypoints!

Reviewer: entry points

### Webpack Configuration

Take a look at webpack's main configuration file, located in `config/webpack.config.js`. If you don't have experience with Webpack there's a lot to take in (a **lot**), but let's focus on what's important. Take a look at the `entry` key on line 127. To Webpack, entry points are a way of specifying the different bundles you want to create. Each entry point will be processed individually. So, what we want to do is specify three entry points, one for each of our sub apps. Create React App centralizes path configuration in a single `paths.js` file. We must edit this file to add information of all our apps. Add this code somewhere on the paths file:

#### Path Configuration

```js
/* config/paths.js */
const apps = {
  CHECKOUT: 'checkout',
  PRODUCTS: 'products',
  STATIC_PAGES: 'static-pages',
};

const appData = Object.values(apps).map((appName) => {
  return {
    js: {
      name: appName,
      path: resolveApp(`src/apps/${appName}/index.js`),
    },
    html: {
      chunks: [ appName ],
      filename: `${appName}.html`,
      template: resolveApp(`public/base-template.html`),
    }
  }
});
```

> The idea is to export the configuration for each of our apps on the `appData` object. The `js` key should make sense, we're specifying the name of the app (`products`) and where it's entrypoint is located (`src/apps/products/index.js`). The `html` key might not make a lot of sense right now, so lets explain.

Reviewer: I would add "**as** we're specifying.."

in this case it is **its** instead of **it's** 

**let's** instead of **lets**

And *voilà*, Webpack now knows where to look for our JS files and thus define the apps correctly. But there's a final task: configure the HTML Webpack generates for each app. We'll do this on the `plugins` key, creating one instance of `HtmlWebpackPlugin` for each of our apps.

```js
return {
  // ...
  plugins: [
    //...
    ...paths.appData.map(appData => new HtmlWebpackPlugin(Object.assign(
      {},
      appData,
      {
        inject: true,
      },
      isEnvProduction
        ? {
            minify: {
              removeComments: true,
              collapseWhitespace: true,
              removeRedundantAttributes: true,
              useShortDoctype: true,
              removeEmptyAttributes: true,
              removeStyleLinkTypeAttributes: true,
              keepClosingSlash: true,
              minifyJS: true,
              minifyCSS: true,
              minifyURLs: true,
            },
          }
        : undefined
    ))),
  ],
}
```

Remember to maintain the relative order of the plugins. Also, keep in mind that you have to *replace* the instance of HtmlWebpackPlugin that is already being created.

> We've done it! Now are apps are correctly split. Sadly it isn't the end yet, but we're getting closer! The last thing we need to do is configure Webpack's development server to serve us the three different apps.

Reviewer: **We did it!**

correctly splitted

### Rewriting Development Routes

> The development server that runs when you start the project in development is biased towards a single-entrypoint implementation. We'll need to change a couple of things to make URL splitting work here. Essentially, the development server needs to know which app it needs to serve on which URL. We can do so with rewrites:

Reviewer: We'll need to change a couple of things **in order to admit URL splitting here**"

## Recap

Here's what we've accomplished so far:

- Create individual entrypoints for our apps.
- Configure Webpack's bundler to support all our apps.
- Configure Webpack's development server to serve different HTML files depending on the URL.

If you try to start the server now, it'll crash. This is because the scripts that are bundled with CreateReactApp's code expect only one Javascript entrypoint. It should be extremely simple to fix this, simply check the start and build scripts on `scripts/`. Once you start the server, you should be met with something similar to this:

<img width="100%" src="/images/url-splitting/app-base-page.png">

To convince ourselves that our apps are different, we can change the background to different colors. Go to each app's `app.css` file and edit the background color. I've used red, green and blue. Now navigate to `/products`, `/checkout` and `/static-pages` and you should be met by three different background colors. This means our server is serving them correctly!.

## Caveats

### Code Sharing

> The whole idea of URL splitting is to avoid serving the user code they probably won't need. On the other hand, we should have a way to share code between our apps, to make everything as DRY as possible. But beware, sharing code between apps can be tricky! Be sure to import only what you'll need on any specific app. You might end up loading every app with code that will never be visited.

Reviewer: **DRY** seems confusing

may instead of might

Reviewer 2: DRY is commonly used I believe.

But I would highlight the text in some form, italics or a tag

Author: DRY is a well-known term, meaning *Don't Repeat Yourself*.

Reviewer: sorry! my fault

> Try structuring your code in a way that shared code is correctly labeled and identifiable. This means global styling files, helpers and generic components. This will make it easier for people who work with your code to know what they're looking at, and give you an idea of how much code you're sharing.

Reviewer: I would say **reusable** code .. and **easy to identify**. (sharing sounds ambiguous)

Also it would be clearer to say "**By this Im referring to** "global styling files...
